
# "Kill One Ant Comes Two Ants”
## by Sim Wong Hoo
Everybody knows that ants are a nuisance and also hope that they will go away. The truth is the more you hope they will go away, the more they will come. Even when there is no more food on your table, they will still come. While you think are a nuisance, have you ever thought that there are your free cleaners too?
Leave any scrap of food on the table, they will come and remove it away for you - free of charge. They leave no mess either. They may look messy when they have a big cleanup job to do. That is when you spill some sweet liquid on your table, and they come in droves to help you clean up. It's your fault, not theirs. They are just doing their job. 
Besides, ants are lots of fun too. I played with ants a lot when I was young, saving a bundle of money from buying toys. I'd still play with them occasionally when they invite me to do so. 
While ants are very simple-minded, we all know that ants have some global intelligence. They are able to tell their fellow ants where the food is, and soon you will see a lot of ants circling around the food. It would be good to try to write a computer program to simulate this intelligence.
My amazing discovery is that the more ants you kill on your table, the more will come. The amazing part is the precise number of ants that will come back. If you kill one scavenging ant, exactly two will return to haunt you the next day. If you kill the two, then four will return the following day. If you kill the four, eight will return. I lose count after eight because you would have to look all over the table, under the books, under the cups, to count all of them. But they are that precise.
And all the ants behave the same universally. The ants from my home, my office, from my kampong, from Singapore, from the USA, they all behave the same way. You kill one, two will return the next day. If you leave it alone, it will be just a lone ant for many days doing its rounds to look for food. Try it yourself at your own peril.
You will say, how can this be? The ant is dead, cleaned from the table, how can it tell the other ants to come? The dead ant seems to have a ghost power. When it is killed, it will become a spirit and return to tell two of its friends to come and haunt you. This ghost power is actually very useful for the ant community because it is telling the rest of the ants that there must be food out there where their fellow ant was killed by humans. What other reasons would an ant be killed? Not a lot. But why only two return and not the whole nest?
This is my theory. It is not necessary for the whole nest to come unless they know for sure there is a lot of food, and this is obvious to all of us. When only one ant is killed, there is a better chance of food. Hence, sending two more to check or reconfirm is good practice. Who gives the sending command? I'd have to say it's the queen ant. She is the only one that has enough intelligence to make such a decision.
I speculate that the whole ant colony is one that has a global intelligence, in which the queen ant is like a central "server". All the ants that move around are the nodes that make up its distributed intelligence. Every night, all the ants would go back to "report" to the queen ant their findings. If a poor ant is killed by you and does not return, the queen ant would know by that night. The next day, the queen ant will command two idle ants, give them the scent of the dead ant, and send them out. These two ants will follow the tracks of the dead ant following its scent to your table. If they find the corpse of the dead ant, they will carry it back as food, no point wasting another chunk of food on your table. If you don't kill them, these two ants will keep coming back every day to beg for food from you. If you kill the two, the queen will miss them that night again, and the next morning she'll send four.
So if you kill eight, must the queen ant know how to do a multiplication of 8x2=16? How about 32x2=64 and so forth? She must be hell of a mathematician. No, the queen ant needs only to know 1x2=2. For every ant that does not return, she will just instruct two to take over. She just passes over the scent to these two. She doesn't know and wouldn't care whether all the missing eight ants are from your table.
I would love to see some of you go and do a computer program that will simulate this. I think we may be able to learn quite a bit from it. The moral of this story is, don't kill the ants on your table. Keep your table clean, and they will give up after several days.

